# Features

### Fundamental abstractions
Every microservice in the Godspeed JS framework has four fundamental abstractions which encompass the functionality of any microservice in general.

- **[Event-sources](/microservices-framework/event-sources/overview):** In the Godspeed JS framework, Event Sources serve as a mechanism for defining the primary entry or initiation points of an application. Developers can use [pre-built](/docs/microservices-framework/event-sources/event-source-plugins/Overview.md) event source types or create their [own plugins](/docs/microservices-framework/event-sources/create-eventsource-plugin.md). For instance, you can opt for an ['Express'](https://github.com/godspeedsystems/gs-plugins/tree/main/plugins/express-as-http#godspeed-express-plugin) type of Event Source to expose your microservice through REST APIs, ['Kafka'](https://github.com/godspeedsystems/gs-plugins/tree/main/plugins/kafka-as-datasource-as-eventsource#godspeed-plugin-kafka-as-datasource-as-eventsource) message bus event source, a 'Salesforce' Event Source, or you may choose a ['cron'](https://github.com/godspeedsystems/gs-plugins/tree/main/plugins/cron-as-eventsource#godspeed-plugin-cron-as-eventsource) type Event Source to schedule recurring calls to specific functions. This level of configurability empowers developers to finely tune the behavior of their application according to their requirements.

- **[Events](/docs/microservices-framework/event-sources/event-types/overview.md):** Events trigger functions. Events are of two types: sync (http: REST, gRpc, Graphql) or async(message bus, socket, cron) Events are generated by event sources like REST endpoints, gRPC, message bus, webhooks, websockets, S3, and more...


- **[Functions](/docs/microservices-framework/functions/overview.md):** functions are triggered by events. They not only perform business logic but also provide orchestration and federation over datasources. They will use datasources to store or retrieve data, join across various datasources, transform data, emit events and send responses. The framework supports two languages for writing functions - javascript and typescript.(/docs/microservices-framework/functions/native-language-functions.md).


- **[Datasources](/docs/microservices-framework/datasources/overview.md):** Datasources are locations where data can be stored or read from. Developers can use [pre-built](/docs/microservices-framework/datasources/list-of-plugins.md) datasource types or create their [custom plugin](/docs/microservices-framework/datasources/create-datasource-plugin.md). For example API datasource (another microservice or third party), datastores (RDBMS, document, key-value), file system, S3 storage, message bus, cache etc. A microservice can use multiple datasources. 

### Schema driven development

The event schema should serve as single source of truth and binding contract between teams integrating microservices or frontend and backend. This allows them to work in parallel, in a decoupled manner, and enhances team efficiency. At Godspeed, this serves as a fundamental pillar of our design. The database schema written in Prisma format generates the CRUD API schema and also the CRUD functions. Further, the schema of all other kind of events whether Sync or Async, follow Swagger Spec to define the input and output shape. From this event spec one can generate a [Graphql](https://github.com/godspeedsystems/gs-plugins/blob/880d8516c17b19dc012535d88c651b60d8454809/plugins/graphql-as-eventsource/README.md) or gRpc schema as well (Planned). Next, for calling an external API, the default API client integration (ex. [Axios](https://github.com/godspeedsystems/gs-plugins/tree/main/plugins/axios-as-datasource#godspeed-plugin-axios-as-datasource) for Nodejs), validates the input and output of the API based on the API's Swagger spec defined in the API integration. To initiate development, the developer needs to first and foremost define the API and data schema.

### Standardized YAML based configurations

We want projects written across languages like JS, Java, Golang to be atleast 70% same via higher level abstractions coded as a YAML DSL. This allows consistency of implementation, helps new developers onboard existing projects easily, prevents technical debt and also eases migration from one language or integration to another.

Events, datasources, configurations and environment variables are defined with high level cross-framework, cross-language, cross-integration abstractions, using YAML-based DSL. functions are primarily scripted in pure JavaScript, Typescript or Java files.

In Godspeed JS, YAML-based DSL simplifies the expression of what is to be done. In many cases, it results in shorter, boilerplate free, comprehensible code compared to traditional programming. Plugin developers define  the custom URI of their event types


### Unified datastore model and API

The unified model configuration and CRUD API, which offers standardized interfaces to various types of datastores, whether SQL or NoSQL. Each integration adapts to the nature of the data store. The Prisma plugin provided by Godspeed JS expose the native functions of the client used, giving developer the freedom to use the universal syntax or native queries.


### Schema driven data validation

We follow Swagger spec as a standard to validate the schema of the event, whether incoming or outgoing events (HTTP), without developer having to write any code. In case of database API calls, the datastore plugin validates the arguments based on the DB model specified in Prisma format.
The plugins for HTTP APIs or datastores offer validation for third-party API requests and responses, datastore queries, and incoming events based on Swagger spec or DB schema. For more intricate validation scenarios, such as conditional validation based on attributes like subject, object, environment, or payload, developers can incorporate these rules into the application logic as part of middleware or functions.

### Authentication

Authentication helps to identify who is the user, and generate their access tokens or JWT token for authorized access to the resources of the application.
The framework gives developers full freedom to setup any kind of authentication. For ex. they can setup simple auth using the microservice's internal datastore. Or they can invoke an IAM service like ORY Kratos, AWS Okta, or an inhouse service. They can also add OAUTH2 authentication using different providers like Google, Microsoft, Apple, Github etc. using pre-built plugins, or import and customize an existing HTTP plugin like Express, by adding PassportJS middleware.

### Authorization

[Authorization](/docs/microservices-framework/authorization/overview.md) is key to security, for multi-tenant or variety of other use cases. The framework allows neat, clean and low code syntax to have a fine grained authorization in place, at the event level or function's task level, when querying a database or another API.
Developers define authorization rules for each event or function task using straightforward configurations for JWT validation or RBAC/ABAC. For more complex use cases, for ex. where they query a policy engine and dynamically compute the permissions, they can write functions or native functions to access the datasources, compute the rules on the fly, and patch the outcome of that function into a task's `authz` parameter. 
These rules encompass not only access to API endpoints but also provide fine-grained data access within datastores, for table, row and column level access. The framework allows seamless integration with third-party authorization services or ACL databases via the datasource abstraction.

### Autogenerated Swagger spec

Following the principles of Schema Driven Development, the event spec of the microservice can be used to auto-generate the Swagger spec for HTTP APIs exposed by this serice. The framework provides autogenerated Swagger documentation using CLI.

### Autogenerated CRUD API

The framework provides autogenereated CRUD APIs from database model written in Prisma format. Generated API's can be extended by the developers as per their needs. We are planning auto generate or Graphql and gRpc APIs, and may release a developer bountry for the same soon.

### Environment variables and configurations

The framework promites setting up of environment variables in a pre-defined YAML file. Though the developer can also allow access by other means via a .env file or setting them up manually. Further [configurations](/docs/microservices-framework/config-and-mappings/config.md) are to be written in `/config` folder. These variables are accessible in 
- Other configuration files
- Datasource, event source and event definitions
- functions

### Log redaction

The framework allows developer to specify the keys that may have sensitive information and should never get published in logs by mistake. There is a centralized check for such keys before a log is about to be printed. 

### Telemetry autoinstrumentation using OTEL

Godspeed JS allows a developer to add auto-instrumentation which publishes logs, trace and APM information in OTEL standard format, supported by all major observability backends. The APM export captures not just the RAM, CPU information per node/pod/service, but also the latency information of the incoming API calls, with broken down spans giving breakup of latency across the calls to datastores or external APIs. This helps to find out exact bottlenecks. Further the logs and trace/spans are correlated to find out exactly where the error happened in a request spanning multiple microservices with each calling multiple datasources and doing internal computation. 
Developer can also add custom logging, span creation and BPM metrics at task level. For ex. new user registration, failed login attempt etc.